# Effects of formalin fixation on polarimetric properties of brain tissue: fresh or fixed?

by
Romain Gros, Omar Rodrıguez-Nunez, Leonard Felger, Stefano Moriconi, Richard McKinley, Angelo Pierangelo, Tatiana Novikova, Erik Vassella, Philippe Schucht, Ekkehard Hewer, Theoni Maragkou

This paper has been submitted for publication in *Neurophotonics*.

This study aimed to analyse the effects of formalin fixation on the polarimetric parameters of brain tissue to evaluate the probability of success of the future transfer of ML algorithms from fixed to fresh brain tissue and vice-versa.


## Abstract

**Significance**: Imaging Mueller polarimetry (IMP) appears as a promising technique for real-time delineation of healthy and neoplastic tissue during neurosurgery. The training of machine learning algorithms used for the image post-processing requires large data sets that can be derived from the measurements of formalin-fixed brain sections. However, the success of the transfer of such algorithms from fixed to fresh brain tissue and vice-versa depends on the degree of alterations of polarimetric properties induced by formalin fixation (FF).

**Aim**: The comprehensive studies were performed on the FF induced changes in fresh brain tissue polarimetric properties.

**Approach**: Polarimetric properties of pig brain were assessed in thirty coronal thick sections before and after FF using a wide-field IMP system. The width of the uncertainty region between grey and white matter was also estimated. 

**Results**: The depolarization increased by 2% in grey matter and decreased by 1% in white matter following FF, whereas linear retardance decreased by 30% in both tissue types after FF. The visual contrast between grey and white matter and fiber tracking remained preserved after FF. Tissue shrinkage induced by FF did not have significant effect on the uncertainty region width.

**Conclusions**: Similar polarimetric properties were observed in both fresh and fixed brain tissues, indicating a high potential for transfer learning.


## Software implementation

> Briefly describe the software that was written to produce the results of this
> paper.

All source code used to generate the results and figures in the paper are in
the `code` folder.
The calculations and figure generation are all run inside
[Jupyter notebooks](http://jupyter.org/).
The data used in this study is provided in `data` and the sources for the
manuscript text and figures are in `manuscript`.
Results generated by the code are saved in `results`.
See the `README.md` files in each directory for a full description.


## Getting the code

You can download a copy of all the files in this repository by cloning the
[git](https://git-scm.com/) repository:

    git clone https://github.com/pinga-lab/PAPER-REPO.git

or [download a zip archive](https://github.com/pinga-lab/PAPER-REPO/archive/master.zip).

A copy of the repository is also archived at *insert DOI here*


## Dependencies

You'll need a working Python environment to run the code.
The recommended way to set up your environment is through the
[Anaconda Python distribution](https://www.anaconda.com/download/) which
provides the `conda` package manager.
Anaconda can be installed in your user directory and does not interfere with
the system Python installation.
The required dependencies are specified in the file `environment.yml`.

We use `conda` virtual environments to manage the project dependencies in
isolation.
Thus, you can install our dependencies without causing conflicts with your
setup (even with different Python versions).

Run the following command in the repository folder (where `environment.yml`
is located) to create a separate environment and install all required
dependencies in it:

    conda env create


## Reproducing the results

Before running any code you must activate the conda environment:

    source activate ENVIRONMENT_NAME

or, if you're on Windows:

    activate ENVIRONMENT_NAME

This will enable the environment for your current terminal session.
Any subsequent commands will use software that is installed in the environment.

To build and test the software, produce all results and figures, and compile
the manuscript PDF, run this in the top level of the repository:

    make all

If all goes well, the manuscript PDF will be placed in `manuscript/output`.

You can also run individual steps in the process using the `Makefile`s from the
`code` and `manuscript` folders. See the respective `README.md` files for
instructions.

Another way of exploring the code results is to execute the Jupyter notebooks
individually.
To do this, you must first start the notebook server by going into the
repository top level and running:

    jupyter notebook

This will start the server and open your default web browser to the Jupyter
interface. In the page, go into the `code/notebooks` folder and select the
notebook that you wish to view/run.

The notebook is divided into cells (some have text while other have code).
Each cell can be executed using `Shift + Enter`.
Executing text cells does nothing and executing code cells runs the code
and produces it's output.
To execute the whole notebook, run all cells in order.


## License

All source code is made available under a BSD 3-clause license. You can freely
use and modify the code, without warranty, so long as you provide attribution
to the authors. See `LICENSE.md` for the full license text.

The manuscript text is not open source. The authors reserve the rights to the
article content, which is currently submitted for publication in the
JOURNAL NAME.
